[Music]
[Applause]
hello and welcome to episode 27 of top
cast I say 27 on YouTube it's episode 27
but if you go to iTunes or if you go to
pod bean or one of those other places
where the audio only versions of these
podcasts come out you'll find the
numbering is slightly different there
are more audio only versions of top
castes and what there are video versions
all of the beginning of infinity
material is definitely on YouTube
however okay so we're still on chapter
11 this is the multiverse it's part 4
now over the multiverse
and I'm anticipating today that will
finish the multiverse so I'm going to be
sticking reasonably closely to the book
today but also at the end we're going to
do a little bit of a short story and the
purpose of the short story is to
emphasize exactly how the multiverse is
indeed a testable theory an testable
against other ways of looking at quantum
theory that have been tried over the
years the other so-called
interpretations so we tend not to call
the multiverse an interpretation of
quantum theory we tend to just call it
quantum theory in the same way that
dinosaurs are just how we explain what
fossils are we tend not to add on this
whole idea of dinosaurs are in our
interpretation of fossils even though
they are but they are the only
interpretation of fossils they're the
only scientific interpretation of
fossils and in the same way if we take
quantum theory literally we are kind of
forced into this idea of the multiverse
because it is a simply a literal reading
of what the equations are saying in
particular I like to refer to their
Schrodinger wave equation so the
Schrodinger wave equation describes all
the for example positions in which an
electron can occupy around a nucleus and
there is a variety of them
simultaneously and so taking that
literally means that the electron really
is in these different positions now not
in the one universe that's not possible
but in although there is a sense in
which the electron is spread out around
the nucleus as we've talked about before
it has this kind of inkblot character as
the David
grubs in the beginning of infinity but
more than that it extends across many
universes occupying all physically
possible places across the multiverse
around that nucleus but let's go back to
the book now recapping what's been said
in previous episodes we've been talking
about this story where there are people
on a spaceship that has a transporter
and the transporter malfunctions
and in one spaceship the transporter
malfunction causes a spark which causes
a person to spill some coffee which then
causes them to have an interaction with
another person which leads to romance
and so on and in the other universe
there is no such spark there is no
transporter malfunction so we have this
differentiation of the universe's that
prior to breach prior to which the spark
or malfunction happened we had fungible
universes we had two universes but they
were absolutely identical in all
respects and then this deterministic law
this deterministic event causes the
universes to differentiate and we had a
story going on so far about that it's a
fictional story and diving straight back
into the beginning of infinity David
writes in the real multiverse there is
no need for the transporter or any other
special apparatus to cause history's to
differentiate and to rejoin under the
laws of quantum physics elementary
particles are undergoing such processes
of their own accord all the time
moreover histories may split into more
than two often into many trillions each
characterized by a slightly different
direction of motion or difference in
other physical variables of the
elementary particle concerned also in
general the resulting histories have
unequal measures so let us now dispense
with the transporter in the fictional
multiverse - let's paused am i a
reflection so onion very contrived
quantum experiments might we get equal
measures by which we mean 5050 so let's
say for example we have a photon heading
towards a half-silvered mirror now we
can contrive the experiment there such
that half of the instances of the
electron go straight through and half of
the electrons instances get reflected
off that's where we have equal measures
that's all measure means it's kind of
like a proportion
however in general this is not what
happens when an electron or when a
subatomic particle an elementary
particle has a choice about what to do I
say choice of course it doesn't have
conscious choice when there is a
possibility of it going one way rather
than another it typically isn't 50/50
the measure of universe is this some
other proportion you know it could be
spread amongst 10 20 30 as long as they
all add up to 100 in the end it could be
any percentage that you like and when I
say any percentage that you like of
course I mean any percentage as
determined by the physical laws that are
governing that particular event at that
particular time let's go back to the
book the rate of growth in the number of
distinct histories is quite
mind-boggling
even though thanks to interference there
is now a certain amount of spontaneous
rejoining as well because of this
rejoining the flow of information in the
real multiverse is not divided into
strictly autonomous sub plus branching
autonomous histories although there is
still no communication between histories
in the sense of message message sending
they are intimately affecting each other
because the effect of interference on a
history depends on what are the
histories are present not only is the
multiverse no longer perfectly
partitioned into histories individual
particles are not perfectly partitioned
into instances for example consider the
following interference phenomenon where
x and y now represent different values
of the position of a single particle so
we've got here x and y so that the
particle could be at either position x
or at position y and in these histories
join together so that the particle is
now at position X and then at some later
time it differentiates again the
university friend sheds again such that
the particle could now be in X or Y once
more and the blurb underneath that
picture says how instances of a particle
lose their identity during interference
has the instance of the particle at X
stated X or moved at Y move to Y as the
instance of particle Y returned to Y or
move to X and David's about to explain
why this kind of question doesn't really
make any sense because fungibility
completely erases in a sense the
identity of which instances which
instance that doesn't make
to ask the question let's persevere
David right because these two groups of
instances of the particle initially at
different positions have gone through a
moment of being fungible there is no
such thing as which of them has ended up
at which final position this sort of
interference is going on all the time
even for a single particle in a region
of otherwise empty space so there is in
general no such thing as the same
instance of a particle at different
times okay
just pause there my reflection this is
just like with the finance example we
had right at the beginning of the
chapter if there's two dollars in your
bank account and the tax office owns one
of them it makes no sense to say which
of them is yours and which of them is
the tax office all we know is that one
of them belongs to you and one belongs
to the tax office but they're fungible
even though there are two there's
diversity within fungibility there's a
difference between them however we can't
say which of them belongs to who so our
usual way of speaking our language has
sort of reached its limits when we start
talking about these things like the
multiverse run the edge of our
understanding of science and I'll just
emphasize now as well the astonishing
fact that you yourself are made up of
uncountably infinite numbers of
instances of yourself possibly
uncountably infinite number if it's not
uncountably infinite lee large then it's
certainly a very large number of
instances of yourself
occupy the space and time where you are
now that's very strange you might think
what does it mean for me to be made up
of many many instances of myself well it
doesn't mean anything over and above
what you thought of your self-identity
prior to knowing this when something
happens where you actually physically
differentiate into two versions of
yourself where you could have gone left
all right and you ended up going left
and copies of you went to the right
you're no longer one of those copies
that went to the right you're only the
instances that went to the left all
those instances that went to the right
they no longer you in a sense they're
copies of you I would say
all the copies that went to the left
well there you and so you feel the way
you feel having gone to the left and you
will never know what it was like to have
gone to the right or what happens to
that person it's like the sliding doors
moving so what I would say about
personal identity is then is that there
are now two versions of you but you are
you and you are different to the copy
that just went to the right you are only
the copies that went to the left and
that continues to happen there continues
to be this branching if you like this
branching of not only elementary
particles but everything in the physical
universe does this as well
again amazing astonishing but not
unbelievable unbelievable okay let's go
back to the book even within the same
history particles in general to not
retain their identities over time for
example during a collision between two
atoms histories the event split into
something like this so either we can
have the two atoms that apparently
collide collide such that one retains
its identity and other we retained its
identity having bounced off one another
that's what their first diagram is
showing or something like that which is
where the two particles pass through
each other in either case they retain
their identities and David writes so for
each particle individually the event is
rather like a collision with a semi
silvered mirror each atom plays the role
of the mirror for the other atom but the
multiversal view of both particles looks
like this where at the end of the
collision some of the instances of each
atom have become fungible with what was
originally a different atom pause
they're just minor functions what I was
saying before about a human being okay
this happens for everything a care
doesn't just happen for human being as
it happens for any living thing cats and
dogs and happens for planets it happens
for anything that you like where
something could have happened one way
but in fact happens a different way
although that differentiation can happen
so far as I know it's not possible for
anything much larger than elementary
particles perhaps atoms okay fine but
nothing like a human being can then
interfere with itself it's not like the
two instances of you
one having gone one set of instances
having gone left on one set of instances
having turned right will then recombine
in interfere I don't think that's
physically possible back to the book for
the same reason there is no such thing
as the speed of one instance of a
particle at a given location speed is
defined as distance divided by time
taken but that is not meaningful in
situations where it is no such thing as
a particular instance of the particle
over time instead a collection of
fungible instances of a particle in
general have several speeds meaning that
in general they will do different things
in instant later this is another
instance of diversity within fungibility
not only can a fungible collection with
the same position have different speeds
a functional group with the same speed
can have different positions furthermore
it follows from the laws of quantum
physics that for any fungible collection
of instances of a physical object some
of their attributes must be diverse this
is known as the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle after the physicist Werner
Heisenberg who deduced the earliest
version from quantum theory pause there
in my reflection emphasizing the word
deduced there so this is not a an axiom
or a postulate of quantum theory it is
derived from quantum theory from more
basic things it is a consequence of the
rest of quantum theory that is what the
uncertainty principle is about so poorly
named as David will explain shortly but
it just means that for any instance or
for any elementary particle let's say
let's stick with elementary particle
like an electron it doesn't have a
super-sharp position it's not in that
particular place at any given time it is
spread out in space like an inkblot so
too is its speed and so in fact the way
that the the way that Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle works is that the
sharper that you try to make your the
position of your electron then the less
sharp things like the speed of the
electron become now for anyone who
studied
classical physics you don't even need
quantum physics for that you will
understand something called diffraction
perhaps okay diffraction of light this
is where you narrow a slit through which
light can pass and the more and more
narrow you make the slit the more that
the light going through the slit spreads
out it diffracts more and more this is
certainly related to quantum theory but
to a first approximation we can simply
talk about the fact that we are
isolating the photons that pass through
the slit to a particular point in space
we've narrowed the x value and by
narrowing that x value the delta x value
the possible positions where it can be
what we make uncertain is all the
different ways in which it can have
momentum it can have speed and so it
could go more to the left
and more to the right so the uncertainty
principle actually kind of predates
quantum theory in a certain sense
there's a version in classical theory
just to do with diffraction simple
classical diffraction back to the book
David writes hence for instance an
individual electron always has a range
of different locations and a range of
different speeds and different
directions of motion as a result it's
typical behavior is to spread out
gradually in space it's quantum
mechanical law of motion resembles the
law governing the spread of an inkblot
so if it is initially located in a very
small region it spreads out rapidly and
the larger it gets the more slowly it
spreads the entanglement information
that it carries ensures that no two
instances of it can ever contribute to
the same history or more precisely at
times and places where there are
histories it exists in instances which
can never collide if a particles range
of speeds is centered not on zero but on
some other value then the whole of the
inkblot moves with its center a bang
approximately the laws of motion in
classical physics in quantum physics
this is how motion in general works
skipping a short bit and then David
writes now put a proton into the middle
of that gradually spreading cloud of
instances of a single electron the
proton has a positive charge which
attracts the negatively charged electron
as a result the cloud stop spreading
when when it's size is such that its
tendency to spread outwards
due to its uncertainty principle
diversity is exactly balanced by its
attraction to the proton the resulting
structure is called an atom of hydrogen
historically this explanation of what
atoms are was one of the first triumphs
of quantum theory for atoms could not
exist at all according to classical
physics okay pause there just my
restriction on reason why classically
atoms shouldn't exist is because in
classical physics we knew that for
example accelerating electrons in a
magnetic field causes electromagnetic
radiation to be produced and so this is
how radio works for example right so a
radio a radio transmitter radio
transmitter well literally a radio
transmitter is like just a piece of
metal right it's a it's an aerial it's a
wire and what you do is you accelerate
an electron up and down that aerial up
and down the wire or antenna I think
sometimes it's called anyway the
transmitter is a piece of wire and the
faster that the electron goes up and
down there then the higher the frequency
of the radiation that escapes from there
but you have to keep on providing energy
in order for the electron to go up and
down so that you can produce more and
more photons of light coming out okay
radio photons if you want to create
radio waves okay and so this is the
principle of how radios operate
electrons vibrate up and down a piece of
metal of some sort okay doesn't have to
be metal these days in the mobile phone
it's not necessarily metal I think it's
a carbon aerial or something whatever
the case energy is provided to the
electrons making them get up and down
and that creates electromagnetic
radiation now if you don't keep on
adding energy to this system to the
transmitter then of course the radiation
will stop the electrons will stop moving
what does this got to do with atoms well
if an atom is really an electron going
around a proton then it's the same idea
as the aerial the electron should be
emitting photons of radiation of some
sort but in general they don't okay
except under very special circumstances
the electron is going around not
emitting radiation but it should be
emitting radiation and especially
because the electron is new
Circle so it's changing its direction
while moving in a circle maybe in a
sphere something like that it's going
around anyway in order for it to go
around you know curved path that means
it's changing its direction if it's
changing its direction there must be
some energy causing it to change its
direction okay a force has to be applied
and if there is no external source of
energy doing this causing it to change
direction then there must be an internal
source of energy causing it to do that
which should cause it to decay into the
orbit to decay into the nucleus so all
atoms should have collapsed on the
classical theory but they don't so let's
just read what David has to say about
this he writes it used to be a mystery
why electrons do not fall on to the
nucleus in a flash of radiation neither
the nucleus nor the electrons
individually have more than one
ten-thousandth the diameter of the atom
so what keeps them so far apart and what
makes atoms stable at that size in
non-technical accounts the structure of
atoms is sometimes explained by analogy
with the solar system one imagines
electrons in orbit around the nucleus
like planets around the Sun but that
does not match the reality for one thing
gravitationally bound objects do slowly
spiral in emitting gravitational
radiation the process has been observed
for binary neutron stars and the
corresponding electromagnetic process in
an atom would be over in a fraction of a
second for another the existence of
solid matter which consists of atoms
packed closely together is evidence that
atoms cannot easily penetrate each other
yet solar system certainly could
furthermore it turns out that in the
hydrogen atom the electron in its lowest
energy state is not orbiting at all but
as I said just sitting there like an
inkblot its uncertainty principle
tendency to spread out exactly balanced
by the electrostatic force in this way
the phenomena of interference and
diversity within fungibility our
integral to the structure and stability
of all static objects including all
solid body bodies just as they are
integral to all motion so pause there my
reflection here just to drive that point
home
if the classical version of the atom was
true
we had this electron orbiting the
nucleus then indeed the atom would be
almost entirely empty space and if the
atom was entirely empty space then atom
should go through each other and no
matter would really be solid because you
know this single little electron
orbiting this tiny little nucleus and
when you sit on a chair you should just
go through the chair and worse than that
you and the chair should go straight
through to the core of the earth etc
okay there should be no solid matter to
begin with if the classical version of
the atom was true but the classical
version of the atom is not true in fact
what's going on is the atom is a
multiversal object and so there are many
many instances of the electron and
because there are many instance of the
electron spread around the nucleus like
an inkblot then you can't have one atom
penetrating another atom very easily
it's extremely difficult happens in
certain circumstances when you get into
neutron stars and the we'd areas of
astrophysics and whatever putting
outside that's situations where the
gravitational force actually overcomes
the electrostatic force but this
tendency to spread out means then the
negative cloud of any given atom such as
the chair on which you sit the atoms on
the chair on which you see it and the
reason that you know you can't push one
hand through the other hand and then how
hard you push is because the atoms in
one hand contain electrons which are
spread out around the atom kind of like
a cloud but better to say like this
they're all the fundable
it many many of the fungible instances
are spread out all around the nucleus
and so to the atoms in this hand and so
the fungible instances here are
repelling the fungible instances there
and you can't get matter to go through
matter for that reason back to the book
the term uncertainty principle is
misleading let me stress that it has
nothing to do with uncertainty or any
other distressing psychological
sensations that the pioneers of quantum
physics might have felt when an electron
has more than one speed or more than one
position that has nothing to do with any
one being uncertain what the speed is
any more than anyone is
uncertain which dollar in their bank
account belongs to the tax authority the
diversity of attributes in both cases is
a physical fact independent of what
anyone knows or fields nor by the way is
the uncertainty principle our principle
for that suggests an independent
postulate that could logically be
dropped or replaced to obtain a
different theory in fact one could no
more drop it from quantum theory then
one could omit eclipses from astronomy
there is no principle of eclipses their
existence can be deduced from theories
of much greater generality such as those
of the solar system's geometry and
dynamics
similarly the uncertainty principle is
deduced from the principles of quantum
theory thanks to the strong internal
interference that it is continuously
undergoing a typical electron is an
irreducibly multiversal object and not a
collection of parallel universal
parallel histories objects that is to
say it has multiple positions and
multiple speeds without being divisible
into autonomous sub entities each of
which has one speed in one position even
different electrons do not have
completely separate identities so the
reality is an electron field throughout
the whole of space and disturbance has
spread through this field as waves at
the speed of light or below this is what
gave rise to the often quoted
misconception among the pioneers of
quantum theory that electrons and
likewise other particles are particles
and waves at the same time there is a
field or waves in the multiverse for
every individual particle that we
observe in a particular universe pause
there in my reflection this can be very
difficult to understand
so there is a strict sense in which wave
particle duality is absolutely false
namely that within any given universe
like the one you occupy the electron is
like this in plotting I prefer to regard
it as more closely related to our
concept of particle than anything else
what it's not is a wave the electron
can't both be isolated at a single point
and spread out throughout all of space
at the same time the wave function
of an electron would suggest that it
just spread out greatly throughout a
vast region of space that's what the way
that's what the wavefunction says and
that's what the wave model of the
electron would also suggest as well if
we were going to go down that path and
regard electrons as waves the electron
is acts far more like a particle okay
I'm the experiments that can be done
like the photoelectric effect show that
the electron is in fact far more
particle like now that's one thing the
other thing is that the multiverse
exists and if you could have a God's eye
view of the multiverse then you would
say that the electron for example to
pick one particle occupies all the
physically possible places literally
Ektron could occupy given its
wavefunction and that would look like a
wave across the entire multiverse across
all the universes any person in a
particular universe can't have access to
all those other universes can't observe
those other universes but someone who
was in theory like a god outside of the
multiverse and looking down at subatomic
particles would say that they're in all
these different positions and that that
multiversal object which is the
subatomic particle or the electron would
resemble a wave all of its positions
would seem to be a wave because it would
be this continuously changing varying
thing sometimes commonly in this place
less commonly in that place you'd have
peaks and troughs and so it would look
like a wave the the way in which you
would see all the different positions of
the electron would resemble something
like a wave
okay now I'm skipping another paragraph
here and then David writes a history is
part of the multiverse in the same sense
that a geological stratum is part of the
Earth's crust one history is
distinguished from the others by the
values of physical variables just as
stratum is distinguished from others by
its chemical composition and by the
types of fossils found in it and so on
a stratum in the history of both
channels of information flow
they preserve information because
although their contents change over time
they are approximately autonomous that
is to say the changes in a particular
stratum or history depend almost
entirely on conditions in
I did and not elsewhere it is because of
that autonomy that a fossil found today
can be used as evidence of what was
present when that stratum was formed
similarly it is why within history using
classical physics one can successfully
predict some aspects of the future of
that history from its past a stratum
like a history has no separate existence
over and above the objects in it it
consists of them nor does a stratum have
a well-defined edges also there are
regions of the earth
for instance near volcanoes where Strutt
have merged although I think there are
no geological processes that split Henry
reemerge strata in the way the histories
split Henry merge there are regions of
Earth such as the core where there have
never been strata and there are regions
such as the atmosphere where strata do
form but their content interact and mix
on much shorter time scales than in the
crust
similarly there are regions the
multiverse that contain short lived
histories in others that do not even
approximately contain histories however
there is one big difference between the
ways in which strata and histories
emerge from the respective underlying
phenomena although not every atom in the
Earth's crust can be unambiguously
assigned to a particular stratum most of
the atoms that form a stratum can in
contrast every atom in an everyday
object is a multiversal object and into
nearly autonomous instances and nearly
autonomous histories yet every other yet
everyday objects such as starships and
betrothed couples which are made of such
particles are petitioned very accurately
into nearly autonomous histories with
exactly one instance one position one
speed of each object in each history
that is because of the suppression of
interference by entanglement as I
explained interference almost always
happens find the very soon after
splitting or not at all that is why the
larger and more complex an object or
process is the less its gross behavior
is affected by interference at that
coarse-grained level of emergence event
in the multiverse consists of autonomous
histories with each coarse-grained
history
consisting of a swathe of many histories
differing only in microscopic details
but affecting each other through
interference spheres of differentiation
tend to grow at nearly the speed of
light so on the scale of everyday life
and above those coarse-grained histories
can justly be called universe
in the ordinary sense of the word each
of them somewhat resembles the objects
of classical physics and they can
usefully be called parallel because they
are nearly autonomous to the inhabitants
each looks like each looks very like a
single universe would pause there my
reflection just recall when I was
speaking earlier about how it's rather
strange to think that you yourself are
made of many many fungible instances of
yourself right now and when a choice is
made in the universe such as you could
have gone left or right instances of you
that have gone right and cease to be you
where if you choose to go left instances
of you that choose to go left are still
you until such time as there is another
choice to make however we don't get
interference of human beings they don't
come back together for the reasons that
David just says here okay the larger and
larger the object becomes the less and
less it's going to be affected by
interference okay back to the book
microscopic events which are
accidentally amplified to that
coarse-grained level like the voltage
surge in our story a rare in any one
coarse-grained history but common in the
multiverse as a whole for example
consider a single cosmic ray particle
traveling in the direction of Earth from
deep space that particle must be
traveling in a range of slightly
different directions but because the
uncertainty principle implies that in
the multiverse it must spread sideways
like an inkblot as it travels by the
time it arrives this inkblot may well be
wider than the width of the whole earth
so most of it misses and the rest
strikes everywhere on the exposed
surface remember this is just a single
particle which may consist of fungible
instances the next thing that happens is
that they cease to be fungible splitting
through their interaction with atoms at
their points of arrival into a finite
but huge number of instances each of
which is the origin of a separate
history in each such history there is an
autonomous instance of the cosmic ray
particle which will dissipate its energy
in creating a cosmic ray shower of
electrically charged particles thus in
different histories such a shower will
occur at different locations in some
that shower
provide a conducting path down which a
lightning bolt will travel every atom on
the surface of the earth will be struck
by such lightning in some history in
other histories one of those cosmic ray
particles will strike a human cell
damaging some already damaged DNA and
such a way as to make the cell cancerous
some non-negligible proportion of all
cancers are caused in this way as a
result there exists histories in which
any given person alive in our history at
any time is killed soon afterwards by
cancer there exists other histories in
which the course of a battle or war is
changed by such an event or by a
lightning bolt at exactly the right
place in time or by any countless other
unlikely random events this makes it
highly plausible that there exist
histories in which events have played
out more or less as alternative history
stories such as fatherland and Roman are
Tona in or which or in which events in
your own life played out very
differently for better or worse a great
deal of fiction is therefore close to a
fact somewhere in the multiverse but not
all fiction for instance there are no
histories in which my story's the
transporter malfunction are true because
they require different laws of physics
nor are there histories in which the
fundamental constants of nature such as
the speed of light or the charge on an
electron are different there is however
a sense in which different laws of
physics appear to be true for a period
of time in some histories because of a
sequence of unlikely accidents then also
the universes in which there are
different laws of physics as required in
anthropic explanations of fine-tuning
but as yet there are no viable theory
there is no viable theory of such a
multiverse pause there my reflection
this is certainly related to what I said
in the last episode if you recall about
these things called Harry Potter
universes places where magic has
appeared to have worked but not places
where magic actually does work okay we
go back to the last episode for that one
and David also mentions there these
other kinds of multiverse multiverses
where different physical laws might
actually be true but we that they're not
scientific theories for now they are
rather metaphysical theories which is
fine there
very interesting and again in the last
episode and the one before that I think
I mentioned these other kinds of
multiverse non quantum multiverses much
larger sets classes in data of
multiverses ok back to the book and
David writes some of my own research in
physics has been concerned with the
theory of quantum computers these are
computers in which the information
carrying variables have been protected
by a variety of means from becoming
entangled with their surroundings this
allows a new mode of computation in
which the flow of information is not
confined to a single history in one type
of quantum computation enormous numbers
of different computation taking place
simultaneously can affect each other and
hence contribute to the output of a
computation this is known as quantum
parallelism in a typical quantum
computation individual bits of
information are represented in physical
objects known as qubits quantum bits in
which there is a large variety of
physical implementations but always with
two essential features first each qubit
has a variable that can take one of two
discrete values and second special
measures are taken to protect the cubits
from entanglement such as cooling them
to temperatures close to absolute zero a
typical algorithm using quantum
parallelism begins by causing the
information carrying variables in some
of the qubits to acquire both their
values simultaneously consequently
regarding those qubits as a register
representing say a number the number of
separate instances of the register as a
whole is exponentially large ^ the
number of qubits then for a period
classical computations are performed
during which waves of differentiation
spread to some of the other qubits but
no further because of the special
measures because of the special measures
to prevent this hence information is
processed separately in each of the vast
numbers of autonomous histories finally
an interference process involving all
the affected qubits that combines the
information in those histories into a
single history because of the
intervening computation which has
processed the information the final
state is not the same as the initial one
as in the simple interference experiment
I discussed but is some function of it
like this
okay and there's a picture or a um a
representation of what's going on we're
in a typical quantum computation you've
got X splitting into all these different
possible histories okay all these
different possible versions then
interference happens and they all
combine together to give you the output
function and David writes just as the
starship crew members could achieve the
effect of large amounts of computation
by sharing information with their
doppelgangers computing the same
function on different inputs so an
algorithm that makes use of quantum
parallelism does the same but while the
fictional effect is limited only by
starship regulations that we may invent
to suit the plot quantum computers are
limited by the laws of physics that
govern quantum interference only certain
types of parallel computation can be
performed with the help of the
multiverse in this way they are the ones
for which the mathematics of quantum
interference happens to be just right
for combining into a single history the
information that is needed for the final
result in such computations a quantum
computer with only a few hundred qubits
could perform far more computations in
parallel then there are atoms in the
visible universe at the time of writing
quantum computers with about 10 cubits
have been constructed scaling the
technology to larger numbers is a
tremendous challenge for quantum
technology but it is gradually being met
of course there my reflection so again
as I've mentioned in previous episodes
once we've got fully functioning quantum
computers of the kind David just
described there where the resources
classically that would have been
required to complete the computation
would exceed all of the atoms in the
known visible universe we have to
conclude that the computational
resources that are actually performing
that computation successfully exist
somewhere and it's not in the visible
universe
hence the multiverse must exist so once
we have that proof if you like once we
have that evidence or that problem the
only known explanation of which is that
the universe and reality is much much
greater than we ever thought then the
majority of physicists one would
we'll be on board with the multiverse
finally now as of today like David says
them we've got quantum heaters back then
when the beginning of infinity was
written of 10 cubits I don't know what
it is today it depends on who you are
asked which university you go to
sometimes in quantum computation now
there is this issue there necessarily
say problem there is this issue where
the results of what's going on aren't
published kind of like with mmm
pharmacology where there is a tension
between commercial confidence and
wanting to keep your intellectual
property to yourself so that your
competitors don't have access the
information you do so that's on the one
hand you don't want to publish all of
your results about how good your quantum
computation is or how good your
particular medicine is there's a tension
between that and the usual process of
peer review and getting other scientists
to be able to check your results to see
that you haven't made errors so I
literally don't know what the best
quantum computer is right now
there are places where things are going
very well where they've got only four
six cubits something like that but
others are claiming they've got you know
hundreds of cubits and they're doing
things but but there's very few
published results and I'm not up on all
that but I'm sure Google search will
reveal more than what I can teach you
here now okay now I'm gonna skip a
significant part here and move on to
something about how discrete changes of
energy can occur especially around an
atom let's say for example where an
electron absorbs a photon when electron
absorbs a photon remember there are a
few things that could happen one thing
that could happen is that nothing
observable happens beyond the photon
striking the electron and then the
photon disappearing and no apparent
change in the electron occurring or the
photon strikes the electron orbiting the
atom and the electron moves up an energy
level around the at
so moves up to a higher orbital or
indeed if the electron is struck by a
photon with sufficient energy it can
knock the electron completely out of the
atom altogether but what we're
interested in here is this idea of the
quantum where where the electron absorbs
just the right amount of energy such
that it moves from one particular energy
level up to another particular energy
level and so the photon coming in is a
single quantum of energy okay but true
what david has to write about this
particular phenomenon and he writes now
let us look at the arrival of that
single quantum of energy to see how that
discrete change can possibly happen
without any discontinuity consider the
simplest possible case an atom absorbs a
photon including all its energy this
energy transfer does not take place
instantaneously forgetting anything that
you may have read about quantum jumps
they're a myth pause they're just my
reflection you can look at David's edge
question answer on what scientific idea
needs to be retired and he said the idea
of quantum jumps and just Google that
quantum jumps David Deutsch and you'll
find some really interesting material
there let's get going David writes there
are many ways in which it can happen but
the simplest is this at the beginning of
the process the atom is in say its
ground state in which its electrons have
the least possible energy allowed by
quantum theory that means that all its
instances within the relevant
coarse-grained history have their energy
assume that they are also fungible at
the end of the process all those
instances are still fungible but now
they are in the excited state which has
one additional quantum of energy
what is that atom like halfway through
the process its instances are still
fungible but now half of them are in the
ground state and half in the excited
state it is as if a continuously
variable amount of money changed
ownership gradually from one discrete
owner to another this mechanism is
ubiquitous in quantum physics and as the
general means by which transitions
between discrete states happen in a
continuous way in classical physics
tiny effect always means a tiny change
in some measurable quantities in quantum
physics physical variables are typically
discrete and so cannot undergo tiny
changes instead a tiny effect means a
tiny change in the proportions that have
the various discrete attributes this
also raises the issue of whether time
itself is a continuous variable in this
discussion I am assuming that it is
however the quantum mechanics of time is
not yet fully understood and will not be
until we have a quantum theory of
gravity the unification of quantum
theory with the general theory of
relativity so it may turn out that
things are not as simple as that one
thing we can be fairly sure of though is
that in that theory different times are
a special case of different universes in
other words time is an entanglement
phenomenon which places all equal clock
readings of correctly prepared clocks or
of any objects usable as clocks into the
same history this was first understood
by physicist Don Paige and William
waters in 1993 pause there my reflection
so that's some very interesting stuff
there about the physics of time and
david has spoken elsewhere about the
physics of time because the time has
this very what was a ton I think was
Thomas Aquinas who said something to the
effect of um I know exactly what time is
until someone asks me time has been
mysterious for a long time in physics
but there is an interview that David
Deutsch gave and I'll link to it in the
description to this video that I think
articulates quite well what time kind of
ears and why isn't as mysterious
sometimes as many people think but let's
not get distracted by that just for now
and I'm skipping a bit and I'm skipping
to a large part about what I would still
call um Harry Potter universes where
David is talking about boiling some
water for example and yes and this is
what in the last episode Brett Weinstein
was very concerned about that sometimes
these highly unlikely events indeed have
and for example if your boiling water
david rides in some tiny sliver of the
multiverse the kettle transforms itself
into a top hat and the water into a
rabbit which then hops away and you get
never neither tea nor coffee but rather
are very surprised that is a history
after that transformation but there is
no way of correctly explaining what was
happening during it or predicting the
probabilities we aren't referring to
other parts of the multiverse or
normalcy larger parts with larger
measures in which there was no rabbit
yes and so there's no reason to reject
the multiverse just because there's this
tiny tiny sliver of universes in which
some bizarre things happen and what
David writes about this okay so we're we
have a situation where you're boiling
water to make tea throughout your entire
life of course every time you boil water
to make tea one would expect nothing
particularly unusual happens but David
does say that well it's consistent with
the laws of physics it's quite possible
for the kettle to turn itself into a top
hat and the water to turn itself into a
rabbit which kin hops away so we've got
these kind of two versions the one in
which you boil water nothing unusual
happens and you make tea and one in
which you end up with the rabbit on that
David says and so I'm skipping a huge
amount here from this chapter from the
beginning of infinity but I'll just
concentrate on the section where he says
quote the rabbit history is
fundamentally different from the tea
history in that the latter the tea
history remains very accurately
autonomous throughout the period in the
rabbit history I end up with memories
that are identical to what they would be
in a history in which water became a
rabbit but those are misleading memories
there was no such history the history
containing those memories began only
after the rabbit had formed for that
matter there are also places in the
multiverse a far larger measure than
that one in which only my brain was
affected producing exactly those
memories in effect
I had an elucidation caused by random
motion of the atoms in my brain pause
there my reflection so just to
emphasize this bit yes it's possible
that indeed a kettle can form itself nor
top-hat and water can form itself into a
rabbit such that boiling tea boiling
water for tea leads this rabbit jumping
out of a top hat
but as david says there not only is that
exceedingly unlikely the tiny tiny
measure of universal earth at which that
happens but if you actually did have
that memory if you actually if that
seemed to have occurred to you the
better explanation according to quantum
theory is that that occurred only in
your brain that there was miss firings
of neurons in your brain that caused you
to hallucinate that exact thing rather
than that exact thing actually happening
okay so quantum theory makes sense out
of those things and David writes
straight after that some philosophers
make a big issue of that sort of thing
claiming that it casts doubt on the
scientific status of quantum theory but
of course they are empiricists in
reality misleading observations
misleading memories and false
interpretations are common even in the
main streams of history we have to work
hard to avoid fooling ourselves
with them so it is not quite true that
for instance there are histories in
which magic appears to work there are
only histories in which magic appears to
have worked but will never work again
their histories in which I appear to
have walked through a wall because all
the atoms of my body happen to resume
their original clauses after being
deflected by atoms in the world but
those histories began at the wall the
true explanation of what happened
involves many other instances of me and
it or we can roughly explain it in terms
of random events a very low probability
it is a bit like winning a lottery the
winner cannot properly explain what has
just happened without invoking the
existence of many losers in the
multiverse the losers are the other
instances of oneself skipping a little
bit more and reaching the end of this
chapter here and it ends in a very
poetic and eloquent way this won't be
the end of the episode but there'll be
the end of me
reading the books I'm going to read at
the final two paragraphs of the chapter
here David writes we know many people we
are channels of information flow so we
histories and so are all relatively
autonomous objects within histories but
we sentient beings are extremely unusual
channels along which sometimes knowledge
grows this can have dramatic effects not
only within a history where it can for
instance have effects that do not
diminish with distance but also across
the multiverse since the growth of
knowledge is a process of error
correction and since there are many more
ways of being wrong than right knowledge
creating entities rapidly become more
alike in different histories than other
entities as far as is known knowledge
creating processes are unique in both
these respects all other effects
diminish with distance in space and
become increasingly different across the
multiverse in the long run but that is
only as far as is known here is an
opportunity for some wild speculations
that could inform a science fiction
story what if there is something other
than information flow that can cause
coherent emergent phenomena in the
multiverse what if knowledge or
something other than knowledge could
emerge from that and begin to have
purposes of its own and to conform the
multiverse
to those purposes as we do could we
communicate with it presumably not in
the usual sense of the term because that
would be information flow but perhaps
the story could propose some novel
analog of communication which like
quantum interference did not involve
sending messages would we be trapped in
a war of mutual extermination with such
an entity or is it possible we could
nevertheless have something in common
with it
let us shun parochial resolutions of the
issue such as a discovery that what
bridges the barrier is love or trust but
let us remember that just as we are at
the top rank of significance in the
great scheme of things anything else
that could create explanations would be
too and there is always room at the top
okay and that's the end of the chapter
and there is always room at the top is
a reflection of Richard Feynman's quip
that there is always room at the bottom
in other words there is a lot of space
down there when you get smaller and
smaller than molecules so you can store
a lot of information in in small stuff
and David there is reflecting that where
there's always more and more space out
there as we get larger as well yeah
david has ended the chapter there with
mention of interesting science fiction
stories and so it's also the way he
began the chapter with an interesting
science fiction story and I have been
promising for about four episodes that I
would explain the way in which the
multiverse can be tested against other
interpretations of quantum theory like
any collapse model for example now I'm
not going to talk about ways in which we
can test the multiverse theory against
for example things like the berm Impala
Twain model as David has explained even
recently these are versions of quantum
theory which really are the multiverse
in heavy disguise I might mention in the
bonilla theory
shortly but what I want to do now is to
tell a story to tell a science-fiction
story about how to test an experimental
test of the multiverse theory against
the Copenhagen interpretation against
any other interpretation that involves
the collapse of the wavefunction and so
for that I'm going to have to change
venue so here we are for the
long-promised
explanation of how the multiverse is
testable now in previous episodes I have
actually explained certain ways in which
the multiverse is experimentally
testable but today I'm finally going to
get to David deutsches own experimental
test of the multiverse interpretation
versus all those other kinds of
interpretations of quantum theory namely
the ones that involves so-called
collapse of the wavefunction so collapse
models now the way in which I'm going to
explain this
experiment is not by simply reading
David's papers that he's written on this
or even going to some other popular
accounts of it but rather I'm going to
try and turn it into a story and the
reason for doing it this way a reason
for telling a story the story of the
experiment is the experiment isn't
practically feasible right now but it
will be one day so it's kind of like how
the Higgs boson this particle that gives
other particles mass was postulated long
before there was an actual practical way
of testing it took the Large Hadron
Collider you know a piece of scientific
apparatus much larger than anything else
that had gone before it it took decades
before the hypothesis of the Higgs boson
could be tested by experiment or rather
before the theory of the Higgs boson
could be tested by experiment namely the
Large Hadron Collider smashing particles
together and seeing what came out and
seeing if we could actually observe the
Higgs boson of course as per periods
what we say is that we weren't
confirming the existence of the Higgs
boson we're refuting all the other ideas
about what those observations could mean
namely if the Higgs boson was some other
kind of particle so every other theory
about what was going on in those
experiments was refuted but the Higgs
boson explanation of the observations
was not refuted and so therefore we say
that those experiments from the Large
Hadron Collider did indeed reveal the
existence of the Higgs boson all right
so now it's story time this is a science
fiction story ends
so perhaps sit back get yourself a nice
cup of tea and enjoy being transported
to the future so picture it it's the
Year 2075 and though quantum computers
are now carried in the pockets of most
people david deutsches proposed test of
Eveready in quantum theory against other
so-called collapse models has yet to be
performed many artificial general
intelligence is actually now populate
the earth and while many silicon's as
the new general intelligences are happy
to be called choose to house their minds
within
bodies that closely resemble those of
typical humans others choose to take the
form of cars or aircraft some few even
choose bodies that double as spacefaring
vehicles because without the need for
oxygen or indeed air of any kind they
can routinely explore the darker reaches
of the solar system just for fun
some of these intelligent spacecraft are
very large indeed as they may carry huge
payloads of batteries and some also
choose to be employed as cargo vessels
shipping resources between earth and
other bodies in the solar system now one
of these space silicon's and the hero of
our story is called Pollux cubit Pollux
has what in the year 2020 would be
regarded as a very unusual body for a
person he has the shape of a very long
about a hundred meters and very wide and
say about 50 meters box which is not
very deep only about five meters deep so
this is his body his body is a box this
is useful for carrying cargo only a
small portion of his body houses
batteries and a landing gear and rocket
fuel for landing and takeoff pilots can
land in any number of configurations and
generally takes off in such a way as to
minimize his cross-sectional area and
reduce air resistance on low gravity
moons he's an explorer that's part looks
he likes to move between places in a
solar system that no one else has been
to before and so this is why he's chosen
the body that he has now on a particular
day somewhere in 2075 Pollux is
traveling from Earth to Jupiter's moon
Europa it has long been known that the
radiation saturating the surface of
Europa from Jupiter is too intense for
any regular human to endure so despite
many probes over the years visiting the
moon few people and no manned missions
have ever landed there
Pollux is a physical chemist by training
and wants to investigate the ocean
beneath the ice on the surface for signs
of life so far no other missions have
found any evidence at all the journey to
Europa is two months long and though he
could enter a kind of hibernation state
most silicon's have found for reasons
yet to be known that the hibernation
state tends to
uncomfortable nightmares about three
days in and terrible dizziness upon
waking for this reason on long journeys
like this Pollux chooses the best known
sleep awake sleep awake cycle sleep
seven hours wake seven hours sleep nine
hours wake nine hours repeat he also has
a list of tasks he set himself to keep
himself occupied one item on the list
that he's particularly excited about
refers to a message in his ongoing
correspondence with the now one hundred
and twenty two-year-old Professor David
Deutsch Pollux asked whether he might be
able to conduct an adapted version of
deutsches test set out in section eight
of his 1985 paper quantum theory as a
universal physical theory as published
in the International Journal of
theoretical physics volume 24 David and
Pollux planned to co-author the paper in
which the results will be published and
finally perhaps putting to rest what
they regard as almost a hundred and
fifty years worth of nonsense in the
foundations of quantum theory Pollux is
huge body ears right now empty and an
almost perfect vacuum isolated from any
other matter as it travels through the
emptiness of space but inside his
cavernous body is one of the most
perfect marks Zehnder interferometer z'
ever to have been created the
half-silvered mirrors near-perfect the
laser perfectly able to attenuate the
beam down to just one photon each
microsecond second or even hour if you
like the detectors the most sensitive
ever created there are two regular
mirrors in the experiment regularly
except for one thing these mirrors are
directly wired to Parks's mind
so I'll just say that again these
mirrors that are inside Pollux as body
are directly wired to his mind
much like the retinas in our eye are
directly wired via the optic nerve to
our brains and our minds so Pollux has a
very special sense organ Pollux can
detect the slightest vibration of these
mirrors due to a collision with
something as small as a single photon
Pollux has a mind running on a brain
with switching speeds as fast as the
speed of light as all AGI in the Year
2075 - and so he is able to record and
transmit data at this speed now I've got
a schematic here a picture of the
internal workings of parallax's sense
organ that is the mirror setup and as we
can see the inner workings of this
particular organ if you like in
Pollock's is brain very similar to the
mark Zehnder interferometer so we've got
some source of photons the half-silvered
mirror where the beam will be split into
an up part and a down part that's the U
and the D the regular mirror there is
care is Pollux as since organ it
connects that regular mirror via some
cable some wire some nerve after Pollux
is mined a similar thing with the other
regular mirror that is on the down part
and then as usual in the marks in the
interferometer we've got a couple of
detectors there detectives 1 & 2 now
Pollux has carefully set up the lengths
of the u the up path and the D down path
according to collapse theories like the
Copenhagen interpretation indeed
according to any interpretation that is
not literal quantum theory saying all
possibilities really do exist mainly a
multiverse when a photon is emitted at
the source
it makes no real sense to ask which of
the paths the photon takes it simply has
a 50% chance of going along their you
path and a 50% chance of going along the
D path if no one observes which of these
pubs it goes along then the photon will
be detected with 100% probability at
detector 1 and 0% probability at
detector 2 this is because of how Pollux
has set up the experiment namely by
ensuring that the path length of U and D
is slightly different but the details do
not matter and I've mentioned this in an
earlier episode as well about the
details of how the marks in the
interferometer works what the collapse
interpretation says as do other
interpretations is that some sort of
interference effect has happened and
that when the photon is finally detected
its detector 1 all the possibilities
have collapsed into
but what the collapse theory also says
is that if anyone were to observe the
photon mid-flight for example if they
knew it was travelling along the D path
and not the U path then the interference
effect would be destroyed and we would
have 50% of the photons going to
detector 1 and 50% to detect it too in
other words there is a special kind of
physics of observation in quantum theory
observation has a special effect in the
world so this is on the Copenhagen or
any so-called collapse Theory
observation has a special role in the
world it has special physics anyone who
says that the wavefunction collapses or
wanders about what happens during
collapse or Wyatt collapses and so on
these people believe in alternatives to
the multiverse but on the other hand
proponents of the Everett way of
understanding quantum theory the
realistic way of understanding quantum
theory the the literal reading of the
equations of quantum theory is to say
that no such collapse happens
observation has no special role
observation does not cause the collapse
of the wavefunction there is nothing
special about observations on this view
the so called measurement problem is
that sometimes called is solved it
dissolves away by saying there is no
special physics of measurement so when
it comes to the inner workings of
Pollock's is brain its sense organs
going on here the Everett understanding
of this is that both possibilities
happen both both the up and the down
paths are followed and this in fact
explains why interference effects occur
the photon is fired from the source the
photon is in fact a multiversal object
when the photon encounters the
half-silvered mirror all the universes
in which the experiment occurs
differentiate into two groups one in
which the photon takes the U path and
another group in which the photon takes
the D path this is the only difference
between the two groups of universes
these two universes then recombine at
the second half-silvered mirror just
prior to the detectors and it is the
literal collision between these two
photons the photons at the U and the D
paths that caused the new recombined
photon to set off the detector at
detector 1 but not detector 2 now the
key thing here for the Year 2075
for Pollock's and what we're now able to
do in the distant future is that power
locks is in fact able to sense the
collision of a photon at either of the
regular mirrors because he has a sense
organ so he is able to observe
interference going on prior to it
happening so power locks his sense
organs are part of the experiment his
sense organs are those mirrors those
regular mirrors he can detect if photons
are striking those mirrors and so he is
an observer of the experiment while it's
going on he the to impossible to do
because we're humans don't have such
sense organs but an artificial general
intelligence of the future could have
such a sense organ could build
themselves such a sense organ and
perform this experiment according to the
collapse interpretation this should
cause the interference effect to be lost
because it has been observed according
to those interpretations I all other
interpretations besides the multiverse
observation plays a key role in physics
it causes the collapse of the
wavefunction at least it is supposed to
so in this view if we repeat the
experiment we should see half the
photons to be detected at one and half
the two no matter what if Pollux is
sensing that is to say observing them
with their sense organs to regular
mirrors and if indeed the interference
fails to occur during this observation
experiment during this interference
experiment and Pollux is observing it
then we have refuted the multiverse
theory this is the sense in which the
multiverse is testable we can refute we
can test we experimentally test and
falsify the multiverse theory of course
we have no real alternative but
according to the multiverse account of
things
no collapse happens so long as power
locks keeps the information about which
mirror he has detected a collision at to
himself here's what goes on according to
little quantum theory I according to the
multiverse the photon at the first half
silvered mirror causes the
differentiation of the universe into two
groups in half the universes the photon
travels the D path
and paar locks in the D universe detects
the collision with the photon in the
other half of the universes par locks
detects the photons having traveled the
you path Pollock's himself actually
splits into two separate versions in
either case Pollux
you or Pollux D in whichever universe he
can record and transmit back to David an
intermediate result and say I can
testify that I have observed a photon
traveling along one and only one path it
must be the same message in either case
now the distances D and you are long and
it takes light some time to traverse
this path so PI lakhs does indeed have
time to do all this because he's got a
fast brain remember but very soon after
he sends that message the message that
says I have detected two photon striking
one of my mirrors and only one of my
mirrors he then sends another message
and he repeats the experiment again and
again as good scientists - sending
message after message back to David
whose part of the experiment if the
messages went something like this I have
detected the photon at one and only one
mirror then the next message comes I
have detected the photon it to take the
two and then I have detected the photon
at one and only one mirror I have
detected the photon at detector one I
have to check - the photon at one and
only one mirror I have to take the de
photon at detector two and so on
in other words roughly half the time
detector one is activated and half the
time detector two years because the
photon only ever takes one path either
the U or the D path it does not take
both paths simultaneously if this was to
happen if this was to happen the
multiverse is refuted however if the
message was said to run this way I have
detected the photon at one and only one
mirror time delay I've detected the
photon that detected two and then I have
to take the photon at one and only one
mirror time delay I have detected the
photon
detective to etc it keeps undertaking it
a detective too then interference has
happened despite the fact that photon
was observed that only ever one of the
mirrors what this means is that the act
of observing the photon has not
collapsed to the wave function and
though the photon was detected at only
one mirror something travelled along the
other path in another universe shoving
aside the photon each time and this
collision forced the recombined photon
to travel always into detector to now
it's crucially important that Pollock's
tells no one which mirror he observed
the photon strike because this ruins the
experiment
it ruins the experiment because once he
says i detect the photon having struck
only one mirror and that is the mirror
corresponding to the you path this means
that the universe have differentiated
still further and cannot come together
again to interfere they cannot become
fungible once more the interference can
happen if and only if the only thing
that is different between them is the
path of this single photon if other
things start to change
like for example power locks sends David
a message that the D path was the one
traveled then David also knows in which
universe he and Pollux are in and that
is a difference in that universe outside
the experiment this is called
decoherence by the lion de coherences
where information is leaked out of the
experiment into the world
differentiating the universes moreover
the message itself will carry different
information in the two universes making
them quite different and increasingly
different as the energy of the message
as it goes as it traveled back to the
Earth collides with objects in the solar
system we need to keep the differences
only and exclusively inside of Pollux is
mind and effectively this entire
apparatus is in Pollux as mind or brain
shielded as it were from the rest of
physical reality
this might seem awfully contrived this
might seem bizarre what on earth are we
doing in the Year 2075 why do I have
artificial general intelligence don't
blame the multiverse theory this bizarre
way of testing them all
verse is not the fault of the multiverse
theory it's the fault of the so-called
mainstream Copenhagen interpretations or
any of the collapse models they're the
weed theory that requires a weird test
to refute that's all it is those
theories that says there is a special
role for observers and so we need to be
able to test this special role of
observers it is observers on that
account on that Copenhagen encount
account on the collapse models account
it is those theories that say there is a
special role for observers that special
role is that the observers collapse the
wave function that's what all other
interpretations say that is the spooky
and strange claim so to rule that out
that's why we need this elaborate method
inside of a mind to test the claim that
observers or minds or something like
that is causing the collapse the
vanishing of all the possibilities
except for one if we can rule out this
single universe model by having
interference between two universes occur
within a single mind then we refute the
observer dependence of quantum theory
with the many-worlds idea of ever and
more precisely Deutsch who replaced the
concept that Everett had of branching of
a small number of universes into a
larger and larger number and instead
david said well that's not quite right
it's not that we start off with a small
number and that number gets greater and
greater and greater over time as quantum
phenomena occur but rather he said that
the number of universes there but the
number of universes that exists all the
way back to the beginning of time a
constant a number and began fungible but
then differentiate when the
possibilities arise we conclude that the
single universe theory and collapsed
models can be refuted by this means the
only known explanation is that the
multiverse did split or differentiate
into two different groups au group in a
d group and these universes then
interfered with each other in such a way
that the photon is only ever detected at
detector 2 and never had detector 1
despite the fact it was observed by par
looks at only one of the two
and this was possible because Pollux
really did split into two versions of
himself different only to the extent of
observing a single photon along the D
path or along the U path now what this
might be like to split into two copies
that are no longer fungible and then to
come back together to have these kind of
sense organs is anyone's guess at all
but I guess he was having fun after all
he did know that he was going to be
authoring a co-authoring a pet would
David dodge about the fundamentals
physics oh that must have been pretty
exciting once the experiment is over it
makes no sense to ask Pollux which
mirror did you actually detect the
photon at was it the mirror at the on D
path or the mirror along the u path
Pollux might be able to say because the
two versions of par logs and indeed the
whole two groups of universes have
recombined at the second half silvered
mirror Pollux simply cannot remember
because he split into two different
copies one of whom experienced you and
one of whom experienced D but he only
recalls ever having experienced one this
is where language kind of breaks down he
both experienced both and one
simultaneously very strange so language
somewhat fails to capture what is going
on here
but the truth is he was both copies for
a very brief amount of time and again
whether this felt like something special
or nothing particularly special we may
be able to interrogate him about that
but he'll never be able to tell us which
mirror he detected the photon at once he
becomes fungible again once the two
versions of him combined together to
become a single version of Pollux once
more so he will in fact be the first
earthling ever to have experienced this
sensation of knowing he was in two
universes at the same time and then
becoming one version of himself in one
universe again now that's if it all
works out as predicted by the multiverse
but what if he does not have this
experience of being in and conscious of
two different non fungible universes
simultaneously well then the whole
experiment would refute the multiverse
because observation apparently
would collapse the wave function or
better to say the multiverse itself has
simply refuted the point is if the
experiment works as predicted there is
no way of explaining any of it by
recourse to a collapse model where all
the universes but one says to exist
so if indeed the interference fails to
happen as predicted then Pollock's is
experiment david deutsches experiment
has roundly refuted the multiverse
quantum theory would then have a hugely
open problem about how observation works
and why it is so fundamental to the
nature of the universe we would need to
develop a new physics of observation and
measurement and physics would become in
part fundamental physics would become in
part about us about people and how it is
that our choice to observe stuff or not
can cause the majority of reality to to
vanish in in in an act of performing a
scientific experiment when we choose to
perform particular experiment we're
causing the collapse of the wavefunction
the collapse of all these other
realities that come to bear causing the
result of the experiment to be the way
it is whereas the multiverse just says
all those realities really do continue
to exist whatever the case the
multiverse is eminently testable by this
technique and in principle falsifiable
so that's that after many months of
promise I hope this satisfies some of
you on the most contentious point when
it comes to the multiverse well perhaps
not the most contentious point one of
the most contentious points namely that
the multiverse is a testable theory from
a number of different angles there are
experiments possible and the strange
experiment here again is not the fault
of the multiverse it's the fault of the
collapse models the proposed observation
is a fundamental thing that affects
reality so we need an experiment that
could possibly refute this ID and
David's version of this is different to
the one that I've just told mine is
based entirely on his of course air is
completely mine but I thought that
because we'd already explained the Mark
Zandi interferometer
I wanted to explain that way of doing
this experiment now the way that David
does it it is via looking at this thing
called the stern-gerlach experiment 20 I
should may be wrong there and a property
of subatomic
particles called spin and so rather than
attempting to explain all of that I've
stuck with what I hope we're already
familiar with if you've been bearing
with me through this multiverse series
and on that this video doesn't quite
finish the multiverse theories series
but for now it does have a couple more
things to say about the multiverse but
we're gonna save those for a more
distant episode for now I wish to move
on to the next chapter chapter 12 a
physicists history of philosophy and
that should be a lot of fun because
bizarre as some of the things that we've
been talking about during this series
have been like the claim for example
that your observations can cause vast
parts of physical reality to cease to
exist the reason why people including
very smart people very smart physicists
might come to endorse or insist on such
ideas or do very bizarre things like
reject the multiverse if not because of
the science but it's because of their
philosophy bad philosophy in an overview
of bad philosophy by David Deutsch is
just the remedy for undoing poor
thinking on this point and it will help
us to understand why quantum theory in
particular in particular has a special
place in the hearts of many many
philosophers because of this bad
philosophy so the scientific community
has sort of treated quantum theory in a
way that's somewhat different to the way
it treats any other scientific theory
but we'll get onto that we'll get on to
why bad philosophy has come to taint our
understanding of quantum theory and
hampered progress in quantum theory next
time until then
[Music]